
BUDDY LOVE The classic “buddy story” is a type that I think of as a creation of the Movie Age. Though there were a few great buddy tales (Don Quixote, for example), this category really didn’t take off as a story form until the dawn of cinema. My theory is that the buddy movie was invented by a screenwriter who realized that his hero had no one to react to. There was just this big, empty space where interior monologue and description is found in fiction. And the screenwriter suddenly thought “what if” his hero had someone to debate important story issues with? Thus the classic “buddy movie” was born, and from Laurel and Hardy to Bob Hope and Bing Crosby to Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid to the antics of Wayne’s World (both 1 & 2), it has become a movie staple. Two guys talking to each other like 48 Hours; two girls talking to each other like Thelma & Louise; two fish talking to each other like Finding Nemo — they all work because stories of “me and my best friend” will always resonate. Again, they’re very human and based on universal circumstances. These are stories you can pitch to a caveman and both he (and his buddy!) will get it. The secret of a good buddy movie is that it is actually

Snyder, Blake. Save the Cat (pp. 34-35). Michael Wiese Productions. Kindle Edition. 

a love story in disguise. And, likewise, all love stories are just buddy movies with the potential for sex. Bringing Up Baby, Pat and Mike, Woman of the Year, Two Weeks Notice, How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days are — genre-wise — just sophisticated Laurel and Hardy movies where one of the buddies is wearing a skirt. And yet the rules for these, drama or comedy, sex or no sex, are the same. At first the “buddies” hate each other. (Where would they have to go if they didn’t?) But their adventure together brings out the fact that they need each other; they are, in essence, incomplete halves of a whole. And realizing this leads to even more conflict. Who can tolerate needing anybody? Penultimately, the All Is Lost moment (more on this in Chapter Four) which occurs toward the end of each of these stories is: separation, a fight, a goodbye-and-good-riddance! that is, in reality, none of these. It’s just two people who can’t stand the fact that they don’t live as well without each other, who will have to surrender their egos to win. And when the final curtain comes down, they have done just that. Often, as in Rain Man, one of the buddies is the story’s hero and will do all or most of the changing (i.e., Tom Cruise) while the other buddy acts as a catalyst of that change and will do slight or no changing (i.e., Dustin Hoffman). I have been in many story discussions about this dynamic. Whose story is it?? is what it very often boils down to. Lethal Weapon is like that to an extent. It’s Danny Glover’s story. Mel Gibson is the agent of change. And though Mel will not be suicidal by the story’s end, it’s Danny Glover whose transformation we care most about. These “catalyst” Buddy Love tales, in which a “being” comes into one’s life, affects it, and leaves, is a subset of the Buddy Love dynamic and an important one to keep in mind. Many “boy and his dog” tales are like this, including E.T. If you’re writing a buddy movie or love story, either drama or comedy, the dynamics of the Buddy Love structure are a must to know. Sit down with a dozen of these, pop ’em into your DVD player, and get ready to be amazed by how similar they all are. Is this stealing? Is Sandra Bullock ripping off Katherine Hepburn? Should Cary Grant’s estate sue Hugh Grant for copyright infringement? Of course not. It’s just good storytelling. And the beats are the same for a reason. Because they always work.

Snyder, Blake. Save the Cat (pp. 35-36). Michael Wiese Productions. Kindle Edition. 